---
title: "MSGJO: a new multi-strategy AI algorithm for the mobile robot path planning"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2025-04-02-paper-14-IJAMT
excerpt: ''
date: 2025-04-02
venue: 'The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology'
slidesurl: ''
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-025-15462-6'
bibtexurl: '../files/paper-14-IJAMT.bib'
citation: 'Wang, B., Zhang, Z., Andriukaitis, D., Liu, X., Hua, D., Li, Z., ... & Chauhan, S. (2025). MSGJO: a new multi-strategy AI algorithm for the mobile robot path planning. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 1-29.'
---
This paper aims to implement the path planning problem for mobile robot in complex environments by golden jackal optimization algorithm (GJO). To address the shortcomings of original GJO algorithm, such as poor exploitation ability and ease of getting stuck in a local optimal region, a multi-strategy improved GJO algorithm (MSGJO) is proposed. Firstly, the random selection strategy of the nonlinear composite adaptive convergence factor is designed to realize the reasonable balance between the exploration ability and the exploitation ability of GJO algorithm. Furthermore, an enhanced sparrow explorer location update strategy is proposed to further search the optimal individual of current iteration, which improves the efficiency of GJO algorithm moving in target direction. Then, the genetic algorithm’s variation strategy is added to randomly transform the disadvantaged individuals in the population into the dominant individuals. The performance of MSGJO algorithm is verified both on classical and CEC test functions (CEC2019 and CEC2022). Meanwhile, when applied to path planning problems, the proposed algorithm can effectively obtain the global optimal and smoother path. Through the results of simulations and experiments, it is demonstrated that the proposed algorithm has better performance than other compared algorithms in environment with both static and dynamic obstacles, which proving the global convergence, robustness, and local obstacle avoidance ability of the proposed algorithm. 
